Add Kibana 9.5.0 release notes (#278785)
elastic/kibana: docs/release-notes/index.md

* Share private agents with selected people using per-agent access control alongside **Public**, **Shared**, and **Private** visibility [#267530]({{kib-pull}}267530).
* Add an embeddable Agent Builder conversation input that opens **Agent Builder** and sends the message with attachments preserved [#272166]({{kib-pull}}272166).
* Make Agent Builder tracing generally available so you can view trace waterfalls for each response, use the built-in traces skill, and monitor activity in the overview dashboard while excluding sensitive prompts and tool parameters by default [#276174]({{kib-pull}}276174).
* Add install, open, and delete controls to the **Agent Builder Traces** option on the **GenAI Settings** page, and prevent deleted dashboards from being reinstalled when {{kib}} restarts [#276643]({{kib-pull}}276643).
* Set a resizable custom width for Agent Builder attachment canvas flyouts in full-screen view and overlay mode in the sidebar [#265200]({{kib-pull}}265200).
* Limit which connectors an agent can use with optional `connector_ids`, so `@` autocomplete and connector search respect the agent's allowed set [#267333]({{kib-pull}}267333).

> * Show permitted system indices and aliases in Agent Builder index selection, including alerts, ML anomaly results, SLOs, the entity store, exception lists, SIEM signals, and {{stack-monitor-app}} [#265819]({{kib-pull}}265819).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Show permitted system indices and aliases in Agent Builder index selection, including alerts, ML anomaly results, SLOs, the entity store, exception lists, SIEM signals, and {{stack-monitor-app}} [#265819]({{kib-pull}}265819).
* Run several Agent Builder conversations at the same time, and track each conversation's status in the chats panel with **In progress**, **Awaiting your input**, **Unread**, and **Error** indicators [#267980]({{kib-pull}}267980) [#271689]({{kib-pull}}271689).
* Route low-effort Agent Builder operations such as {{esql}} generation and conversation title generation to a configurable fast model, set per feature in **Feature settings**, with automatic fallback to the default model [#265520]({{kib-pull}}265520) [#274849]({{kib-pull}}274849) [#275607]({{kib-pull}}275607).
```

Adding two 9.5 GA features that didn't auto-generate because their PRs are all `release_note:skip:`

* Fix product documentation installation when `xpack.productDocBase.artifactRepositoryProxyUrl` was silently ignored [#274646]({{kib-pull}}274646).
* Fix **Elastic documentation** installation failures during {{infer}} scale-up, and clarify error messages in **GenAI Settings** [#270005]({{kib-pull}}270005).
* Fix ARM ELSER {{infer}} endpoint selection during **Elastic documentation**, OpenAPI spec, and **Security Labs** installation [#266234]({{kib-pull}}266234).
* Fix **Elastic documentation** installation failing when the selected artifact version is unavailable by falling back to an earlier version [#265116]({{kib-pull}}265116).
* Fix an error toast on the ML overview **Memory usage** section when you lack ML node permissions, and show **Manage jobs** shortcuts when you have a read-only role [#273898]({{kib-pull}}273898).
* Fix file upload creating a data view when you lack index-pattern save privileges [#268167]({{kib-pull}}268167).
* Fix missing anomaly actions on the single metric chart in **Anomaly Explorer** [#263925]({{kib-pull}}263925).
* Fix the {{anomaly-job}} wizard so JSON edits on any step update the wizard controls [#263117]({{kib-pull}}263117).

**Workflows**:

> * Fix Elastic Workflows version history failing to record changes on newly provisioned clusters when {{es}} is temporarily unavailable [#278387]({{kib-pull}}278387).

Reviewer 2: @dej611 should https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/277042 be added here or do you want to wait to confirm that the next BC picks up the fix?

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review.

* Replace the **Status** filter on **Browse integrations** with a **More** filter, and hide deprecated integrations and content packs by default [#277812]({{kib-pull}}277812).
* Add an optional `dryRun` parameter to {{fleet}} bulk agent API endpoints so you can preview affected agent counts without creating actions [#276377]({{kib-pull}}276377).
* Remove the **Give feedback** button from the {{fleet}} top navigation [#273641]({{kib-pull}}273641).
* Update the **Add Collector** flyout in {{fleet}} to generate collector configs that ship through the {{ecloud}} Managed OTLP Endpoint when available [#270324]({{kib-pull}}270324).
* Add **Condition** fields to integration, input, and stream settings in the package policy editor [#270315]({{kib-pull}}270315).
* Add support for using a remote {{es}} output as the exporter target for OpenTelemetry integrations as a technical preview [#270267]({{kib-pull}}270267).
* Add a `data_stream.type` variable to the simplified package policy API so input-only packages can route data to a different index prefix (for example, `logs-*` instead of `metrics-*`) [#269895]({{kib-pull}}269895).

> **Data management**:

Reviewer 3: @florent-leborgne We need to add something about ES|QL Data Federation support. https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/265681 - While that PR adds the management app for the feature, it allows the querying of external data sources anywhere where ES|QL is used which makes it a large and cross cutting feature.

Author: Added an entry in ae83b6b0227a. Let me know what you think.

* Replace the **Status** filter on **Browse integrations** with a **More** filter, and hide deprecated integrations and content packs by default [#277812]({{kib-pull}}277812).
* Add an optional `dryRun` parameter to {{fleet}} bulk agent API endpoints so you can preview affected agent counts without creating actions [#276377]({{kib-pull}}276377).
* Remove the **Give feedback** button from the {{fleet}} top navigation [#273641]({{kib-pull}}273641).
* Update the **Add Collector** flyout in {{fleet}} to generate collector configs that ship through the {{ecloud}} Managed OTLP Endpoint when available [#270324]({{kib-pull}}270324).
* Add **Condition** fields to integration, input, and stream settings in the package policy editor [#270315]({{kib-pull}}270315).
* Add support for using a remote {{es}} output as the exporter target for OpenTelemetry integrations as a technical preview [#270267]({{kib-pull}}270267).
* Add a `data_stream.type` variable to the simplified package policy API so input-only packages can route data to a different index prefix (for example, `logs-*` instead of `metrics-*`) [#269895]({{kib-pull}}269895).

**Data management**:

> * Add **ES|QL Data Federation** in {{stack-manage-app}} as a technical preview, so you can create and manage external data sources and datasets for {{esql}} queries [#265681]({{kib-pull}}265681).

Reviewer 4: Unfortunately, we need to change this again. My proposal:

> Add **ES|QL Data Federation** in {{stack-manage-app}} as experimental, so you can create and manage external data sources and datasets for {{esql}} queries. To enable set: xpack.dataFederation.enabled: true in your kibana.yml [#265681]({{kib-pull}}265681).

Awaiting final confirmation

Author: Thanks @alisonelizabeth. Is this setting also reachable for ECH users/allowlisted?

Reviewer 5: cc @mattkime

Reviewer 6: @florent-leborgne I can make sure we're aligned here before the release goes out :)

updated note in https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/278785#discussion_r3676455885

Author: Thanks!

> * Add **ES|QL Data Federation** in {{stack-manage-app}} as a technical preview, so you can create and manage external data sources and datasets for {{esql}} queries [#265681]({{kib-pull}}265681).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Add [**ES|QL Data Federation**](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-data-federation.md) management UI in {{stack-manage-app}}. This feature enables you to create and manage external data sources (Amazon S3 initially) and query datasets using {{esql}} [#265681]({{kib-pull}}265681).
  * This is an experimental feature and is not enabled by default. To try it out, set `esql.federation.enabled: true` in your Elasticsearch configuration and `xpack.dataFederation.enabled: true` in your Kibana configuration.
```

something like this

% FEATURES, ENHANCEMENTS, FIXES
% Paste in index.md

## 9.5.0 [kibana-9.5.0-release-notes]

% ::::{NOTE}
% ::::

### Features and enhancements [kibana-9.5.0-features-enhancements]

**Elastic Agent Builder**:
* Create skills in Agent Builder chat, preview drafts in attachments, and save them from the conversation [#265883]({{kib-pull}}265883).
* Enable Agent Builder to pause and ask up to five clarifying multiple-choice questions before acting, then resume after you answer [#274672]({{kib-pull}}274672).
* Share private agents with selected people using per-agent access control alongside **Public**, **Shared**, and **Private** visibility [#267530]({{kib-pull}}267530).
* Add an embeddable Agent Builder conversation input that opens **Agent Builder** and sends the message with attachments preserved [#272166]({{kib-pull}}272166).

> * Make Agent Builder tracing generally available so you can view trace waterfalls for each response, use the built-in traces skill, and monitor activity in the overview dashboard while excluding sensitive prompts and tool parameters by default [#276174]({{kib-pull}}276174).

Reviewer 7: Double-checking @machadoum traces are enabled, but are we calling them "GA"? Or are they still a "Preview" feature?

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review.

* Add install, open, and delete controls to the **Agent Builder Traces** option on the **GenAI Settings** page, and prevent deleted dashboards from being reinstalled when {{kib}} restarts [#276643]({{kib-pull}}276643).
* Set a resizable custom width for Agent Builder attachment canvas flyouts in full-screen view and overlay mode in the sidebar [#265200]({{kib-pull}}265200).

> * Limit which connectors an agent can use with optional `connector_ids`, so `@` autocomplete and connector search respect the agent's allowed set [#267333]({{kib-pull}}267333).

Reviewer 7: This is still behind the experimental feature flag, IDK if we should be including it in release notes. CC @erikcurrin-elastic

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review.

* Show permitted system indices and aliases in Agent Builder index selection, including alerts, ML anomaly results, SLOs, the entity store, exception lists, SIEM signals, and {{stack-monitor-app}} [#265819]({{kib-pull}}265819).

> **Alerting and cases**:

Reviewer 2: @michaelolo24 I believe the following items are missing from these release notes -- prob because they were spread over multiple PRs that needed to be skipped for release notes. Can you provide brief release note summaries for them (1-2 sentences max) and the PR(s) that you want to ref from release notes?
- Cases as data is GA'ing
- Redesigned Cases UI
- Redesigned attachments UX

@dominiqueclarke I think https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/273804 should be included in these release notes too, since they introduce new Kibana feature privs for alerts from Stack rules. Can you provide a brief descriptive summary for the PR?

Reviewer 8: For the new Stack Alerts privilege it's "Introduces a new Stack Alerts Kibana feature privilege that allows users to perform per-alert actions (mute, unmute, acknowledge) and read alerts across all stack rule types, without granting full rule management capabilities."

Do we have coverage for the Observability Alerts feature privilege also? If not, it's "Introduces a new Observability Alerts Kibana feature privilege that allows users to perform per-alert actions (mute, unmute, acknowledge) and read alerts across all Observability rule types, without granting full rule management capabilities."

Reviewer 9: Hi @nastasha-solomon – I’ve drafted some one-liners for the above, but I’ll need @michaelolo24 to provide the appropriate PRs to include with these.

- **Cases as Data**: Cases as Data is now GA and on by default across all deployment types, including Serverless, with a simplified three-index structure, a pre-built Case Analytics data view, and auto-typed runtime fields for custom fields.
- **Redesigned Cases UI**: The case list, case detail, and settings pages have been redesigned to improve overall usability and reduce friction across core case workflows.
- **Redesigned attachments UX**: All case attachments are now organized in a unified tab with collapsible sections by type, item counts, and the ability to filter attachments by type and author.

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review. @melissaburpo your suggestions were slightly rewritten for consistency with the general styling of these release notes. Also these release notes aren't for serverless. There are specific serverless release notes. If we need something there too that is not currently stated (or not correctly), let us know

Reviewer 10: Hey @nastasha-solomon  - sorry, finally up for air from the flurry of coding last couple of weeks. I copied and pasted @melissaburpo 's one liners with the relevant PRs here.

**Cases as Data:** Cases as Data is now GA and on by default across all deployment types, including Serverless, with a simplified three-index structure, a pre-built Case Analytics data view, and auto-typed runtime fields for custom fields. https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/269581, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275686, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/276117, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/277580

**Redesigned Cases UI**: The case list, case detail, and settings pages have been redesigned to improve overall usability and reduce friction across core case workflows. https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/271618, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/274339, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/273527, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275053, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275191, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275191, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275191, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/275191, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/277092

**Redesigned attachments UX**: All case attachments are now organized in a unified tab with collapsible sections by type, item counts, and the ability to filter attachments by type and author. https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/269560, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/269560, https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/272951

* Add a **Snowflake** connector to run SQL queries, explore databases and tables, and search with Cortex Search in Agent Builder and Workflows [#264827]({{kib-pull}}264827).
* Add an **Azure Blob Storage** connector to list containers and blobs, read blob content, and search storage in Agent Builder and Workflows [#259439]({{kib-pull}}259439).
* Add a **HubSpot** connector to search and retrieve contacts, companies, deals, tickets, and engagements in Agent Builder and Workflows [#257675]({{kib-pull}}257675).
* Add a **Filter by feature** control to the create-connector flyout, and show the HTTP connector in standard connector lists [#271686]({{kib-pull}}271686).
* Improve authentication options for Agent Builder connectors by listing recommended methods first with a **Recommended** badge and hiding legacy options when you create new connectors [#273410]({{kib-pull}}273410).
* Add `secretQueryParams` support to the HTTP connector so encrypted query parameters are stored in connector secrets and injected into request URLs [#258291]({{kib-pull}}258291).

> * Add workflow steps to the **Slack (v2)** connector to look up conversation history, channel details, workspace users, and users by email [#273548]({{kib-pull}}273548).

Reviewer 7: @Kiryous can you confirm? This wasn't workflow specific, though can be used through workflows?

```suggestion
* Add new capabilities to the **Slack (v2)** connector to look up conversation history, channel details, workspace users, and users by email [#273548]({{kib-pull}}273548).
```

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review.

* Enable OAuth authorization for the **GitHub** and **Slack (v2)** connectors so you can connect using your own OAuth apps [#259549]({{kib-pull}}259549).
* Add **OAuth Client Credentials (Private Key JWT)** authentication to the **SharePoint Online** connector so you can authenticate with a certificate instead of a client secret [#268847]({{kib-pull}}268847).

> * Add **Quick Connect OAuth 2.0** authentication to the **Microsoft Teams** and **SharePoint Online** connectors, and narrow the default **SharePoint Online** OAuth scope to `Sites.Selected` for tighter site access [#265727]({{kib-pull}}265727).

Reviewer 7: @erikcurrin-elastic did this make it out from behind the EARS feature flag? If so, should the same be listed for Slack?

Author: Addressed in ae83b6b0227a. Please review.

* Add and remove **Options list**, **Range slider**, and **Time slider** controls on dashboards from Agent Builder chat [#275584]({{kib-pull}}275584).
* Create and edit custom Vega visualizations in Agent Builder chat [#275257]({{kib-pull}}275257).
* Add **Links** panel support to the Dashboards API [#268965]({{kib-pull}}268965).
* Add `access_control.access_mode` support to `PUT /api/dashboards/{id}` for updating dashboard permissions [#266700]({{kib-pull}}266700).
* Add a **Write a query** values source for filter controls so you can pre-filter options-list and range-slider values with {{esql}} [#266492]({{kib-pull}}266492).
* Highlight related dashboard panels when you select an {{esql}} control label [#264426]({{kib-pull}}264426).
* Add feedback when filters or drilldowns cannot apply to computed values on {{esql}} XY, heatmap, and partition charts [#269722]({{kib-pull}}269722).
* Show unavailable filter and drilldown actions with an explanation when a {{esql}} data table column is not filterable [#269635]({{kib-pull}}269635).

> * Apply the same **Fast mode** approximation setting from {{esql}} dashboard panels to **Vega** visualizations that use the same query [#276999]({{kib-pull}}276999).

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
that use the same query 
```

what the same query means here? I think we just need to say that use an ES|QL query, no?

Author: ```suggestion
* Make the **Fast mode** approximation option applicable to **Vega** visualizations that use an {{esql}} query [#276999]({{kib-pull}}276999).
```
Yes this sentence sounded strange 👍

Reviewer 11: amazing!

* Add AI-driven inline code completion in the {{esql}} editor, including ghost hints and **Undo AI fix** / **Keep AI fix** review actions [#256857]({{kib-pull}}256857).
* Add **Fix with AI** quick-fix actions for {{esql}} validation errors in the editor [#269455]({{kib-pull}}269455).
* Enable **Natural language** to {{esql}} in the {{esql}} editor when your subscription level includes this feature [#266561]({{kib-pull}}266561).
* Warn when a closed lookup index is referenced in `LOOKUP JOIN` instead of offering **Create lookup index** [#274534]({{kib-pull}}274534).
* Sort columns in the **Lookup Index** editor [#273734]({{kib-pull}}273734).
* Replace free-text filtering with **KQL** search and autocomplete in the **Lookup Index** editor [#271284]({{kib-pull}}271284).
* Make the {{esql}} `FUSE` command generally available [#273994]({{kib-pull}}273994).
* Improve recommended {{esql}} queries for remote-cluster sources [#273292]({{kib-pull}}273292).

> **{{kib}} platform**:

Author: cc @alexmarhaba here

Reviewer 12: thanks! my agent missed it

* Add a customization modal for reordering and hiding solution navigation items, with personalized preferences preserved across sessions [#270276]({{kib-pull}}270276).

> * Add a technical-preview date range picker in Discover and Dashboards that accepts flexible relative and absolute time ranges in plain text [#260163]({{kib-pull}}260163).

Author: ```suggestion
* Add a new date range picker in Discover and Dashboards that accepts flexible relative and absolute time ranges in plain text [#260163]({{kib-pull}}260163).
```

**{{kib}} platform**:
* Add a customization modal for reordering and hiding solution navigation items, with personalized preferences preserved across sessions [#270276]({{kib-pull}}270276).
* Add a new date range picker in Discover and Dashboards that accepts flexible relative and absolute time ranges in plain text [#260163]({{kib-pull}}260163).

> * Add nine commonly used presets to the time picker, including **Yesterday**, **Last 3 hours**, and **This week until now** [#270254]({{kib-pull}}270254).

Author: @alexmarhaba here you go
